Interprocess communication is at the heart of all distributed systems. It makes no sense to study distributed systems without carefully examining the ways that processes on different machines can exchange information. Communication in distributed systems is always based on low-level message passing as offered by the underlying network. Expressing communication through message passing is harder than using primitives based on shared memory, as available for nondistributed platforms. Modem distributed systems often consist of thousands or even millions of processes scattered across a network with unreliable communication such as the Internet. Unless the primitive communication facilities of computer networks are replaced by something else, development of large-scale distributed applications is extremely difficult.

In this chapter, we start by discussing the rules that communicating processes must adhere to, known as protocols, and concentrate on structuring those protocols in the form of layers. We then look at three widely-used models for communication: __Remote Procedure Call (RPC)__, __Message-Oriented Middleware (MOM)__, and __data streaming__. We also discuss the general problem of sending data to multiple receivers, called __multicasting__.

Our first model for communication in distributed systems is the remote procedure call (RPC). An RPC aims at hiding most of the intricacies of message passing, and is ideal for client-server applications.In many distributed applications, communication does not follow the rather strict pattern of client-server interaction. In those cases, it turns out that thinkingin terms of messages is more appropriate. However, the low-level communication facilities of computer networks are in many ways not suitable due to their lack of distribution transparency. An alternative is to use a high-level message-queuing model, in which communication proceeds much the same as in electronic maiI systems. Message-oriented middleware (MOM) is a subject important enough to warrant a section of its own. With the advent of multimedia distributed systems, it became apparent that many systems were lacking support for communication of continuous media, such as audio and video. What is needed is the notion of a stream that can support the continuous flow of messages, subject to various timing constraints. Streams are discussed in a separate section. Finally, since our understanding of setting up multicast facilities has improved, novel and elegant solutions for data dissemination have emerged.

## 4.1 FUNDAMENTALS
