## What is Shared nothing architecture?
A shared nothing architecture (SN) is a distributed computing architecture in which each node is independent and self-sufficient, and there is no single point of contention across the system. More specifically, none of the nodes share memory or disk storage. People typically contrast SN with systems that keep a large amount of centrally-stored state information, whether in a database, an application server, or any other similar single point of contention.

The advantages of SN architecture versus a central entity that controls the network (a controller-based architecture) include eliminating any single point of failure, allowing self-healing capabilities and providing an advantage with offering non-disruptive upgrade.

## Applications
__Shared nothing is popular for web development because of its scalability.__ As Google has demonstrated, a pure SN system can scale almost infinitely simply by adding nodes in the form of inexpensive computers, since there is no single bottleneck to slow the system down. Google calls this sharding. A SN system typically partitions its data among many nodes on different databases (assigning different computers to deal with different users or queries), or may require every node to maintain its own copy of the application's data, using some kind of coordination protocol. This is often referred to as database sharding.

There is some doubt about whether a web application with many independent web nodes but a single, shared database (clustered or otherwise) should be counted as SN. One of the approaches to achieve SN architecture for stateful applications (which typically maintain state in a centralized database) is the use of a __data grid__, also known as __distributed caching__. This still leaves the centralized database as a single point of failure.(But you can distribute the database as well)

Shared nothing architectures have become prevalent in the data warehousing space. There is much debate as to whether the shared nothing approach is superior to shared Disk[6] with sound arguments presented by both camps. Shared nothing architectures certainly take longer to respond to queries that involve joins over large data sets from different partitions (machines). However, the potential for scaling is huge.

## What is shared?
While there is no single point of contention within the software/hardware components of SN systems, information from disparate nodes may still need to be reintegrated at some point. Such points occur wherever an information system that is outside the SN architecture queries information from disparate nodes within the SN architecture for a single purpose. Examples of such external nodes might be:
* persons (minds) who look at two SN nodes and decide that they hold or process data about the same thing (simply recognising that two nodes belong to the same SN system would be sufficient)
* any software/hardware system that is written to query different nodes within the SN architecture

## Overview
With the introduction of Social Media such as Facebook, Twitter, Reddit, the world is more connected than ever before. This new era has brought with it a host of issues, namely that relate to scalability. The potential for virality is at its peak with websites experiencing the Slashdot effect more often, and for many the question of scalability has become a real challenge. We can look to traditional literature for help, specifically to the subject of distributed systems since the Worldwide Web is essentially just a very large distributed system.

We can find the answer we are looking for in the Shared Nothing Architecture. This is a distributed computing concept that advocates all nodes in a system to be independent and self-sufficient, such that there is no single point of contention across the system. __In simple terms this means that there is no sharing of disk or memory between the nodes.__ Applied to web-based systems, this architecture provides us with a simple yet very effective technique to achieve massive scalability. The process is explained below.

Before we dive into the specific techniques, it is important to understand what scalability really means. Quoting Wikipedia ```“[scalability is] the capability of a system to increase total throughput under an increased load when resources (typically hardware) are added.”``` __This definition implies that the total capability of the system is directly proportional to the underlying resources it is provided with.__ Such scalability can only be achieved practically when certain design constraints are adhered to. Shared Nothing Architecture (SNA) is exactly this set of constraints for scalable systems. __The two restrictions imposed are 1) No shared disk and 2) No shared memory.__

In a web-based system, the sharing of a disk is typically required for two reasons: for storing files and for database storage. The need for sharing due to file storage can be removed either by using a remote file system and using mount points on systems wanting to access the files, or by using a dedicated storage (or database) for files also referred to as BLOB storage. Contention related to database storage can be removed by moving the Database server software (RDBMS) to a separate, dedicated server and accessing the database from that server.

The issue of sharing of memory is more complicated to circumvent. Two kinds of data are stored in memory: Session data and Cache data. Session data is used in web applications to store user credentials, temporary data, form data and other information. __There are two solutions to the storage of Session data. One is the use of a separate database for this purpose and the other is storing all session data in the browser’s cookies (limited to a maximum size of 4 Kb).__ Caching is employed in web applications to speed up database operations. A solution is using distributed caching systems such as Memcache. Also like Session data, a separate database can be setup to exclusively manage and store Cache data.

By decoupling a web system in this way, it is possible to scale the system with increased load. Since each node of the system would be independent and self-sufficient (prerequisite for a SN architecture), the addition of new nodes would result in increased capacity of the overall system. A load balancer could then be added in front of the node cluster to receive the incoming traffic and distribute requests to the backend nodes. The resultant system would then be able to grow or shrink, hence achieving the goal of scalability. Nothing in the technique presented is limited to any one particular software stack or technology. 


