In the previous chapter, we learned that the network layer provides a communica- tion service between any two network hosts. Between the two hosts, datagrams travel over a series of communication links, some wired and some wireless, starting at the source host, passing through a series of packet switches (switches and routers) and ending at the destination host. As we continue down the protocol stack, from the network layer to the link layer, we naturally wonder how packets are sent across the individual links that make up the end-to-end communication path. 

In discussing the link layer, we’ll see that there are two fundamentally different types of link-layer channels. The first type are broadcast channels, which connect mul- tiple hosts in wireless LANs, satellite networks, and hybrid fiber-coaxial cable (HFC) access networks. Since many hosts are connected to the same broadcast communica- tion channel, a so-called medium access protocol is needed to coordinate frame transmission. In some cases, a central controller may be used to coordinate transmis- sions; in other cases, the hosts themselves coordinate transmissions. The second type of link-layer channel is the point-to-point communication link, such as that often found between two routers connected by a long-distance link, or between a user’s office computer and the nearby Ethernet switch to which it is connected. Coordinating access to a point-to-point link is simpler; the reference material on this book’s web site has a detailed discussion of the Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP), which is used in set- tings ranging from dial-up service over a telephone line to high-speed point-to-point frame transport over fiber-optic links.

## 5.1 Introduction to the Link Layer

Let’s begin with some important terminology. We’ll find it convenient in this chapter to refer to any device that runs a link-layer (i.e., layer 2) protocol as a __node__. Nodes include hosts, routers, switches, and WiFi access points. We will also refer to the communication channels that connect adjacent nodes along the communication path as __links__. In order for a datagram to be transferred from source host to destination host, it must be moved over each of the individual links in the end-to-end path. As an example, in the company network shown at the bottom of Figure 5.1, consider sending a datagram from one of the wireless hosts to one of the servers. This datagram will actually pass through six links: a WiFi link between sending host and WiFi access point, an Ethernet link between the access point and a link-layer switch; a link between the link-layer switch and the router, a link between the two routers; an Ethernet link between the router and a link-layer switch; and finally an Ethernet link between the switch and the server. Over a given link, a transmitting node encapsulates the datagram in a __link-layer frame__ and transmits the frame into the link.

### 5.1.1 The Services Provided by the Link Layer



