A __bastion host__ is a special purpose computer on a network specifically designed and configured to withstand attacks. The computer generally hosts a single application, for example a proxy server, and all other services are removed or limited to reduce the threat to the computer. It is hardened in this manner primarily due to its location and purpose, which is either on the outside of a firewall or in a __demilitarized zone (DMZ)__ and usually involves access from untrusted networks or computers.

In an Amazon Web Services (AWS) context, a bastion host is defined as "a server whose purpose is to provide access to a private network from an external network, such as the Internet. Because of its exposure to potential attack, a bastion host must minimize the chances of penetration."[3]. A further AWS related definition is that bastion hosts are "instances that sit within your public subnet and are typically accessed using SSH or RDP. Once remote connectivity has been established with the bastion host, it then acts as a ‘jump’ server, allowing you to use SSH or RDP to log in to other instances (within private subnets) deeper within your VPC. When properly configured through the use of security groups and Network ACLs (NACLs), the bastion essentially acts as a bridge to your private instances via the internet."

> A jump server or jump host or jumpbox or secure administrative host is a (special-purpose) computer on a network typically used to manage devices in a separate security zone. The most common example is managing a host in a DMZ from trusted networks or computers. 

