### What is Secure Shell (SSH) ?
Secure Shell (SSH) is a cryptographic network protocol for operating network services securely over an unsecured network. The best known example application is for remote login to computer systems by users.</br>
SSH provides a secure channel over an unsecured network in a client-server architecture, connecting an SSH client application with an SSH server. Common applications include remote command-line login and remote command execution, but any network service can be secured with SSH. The protocol specification distinguishes between two major versions, referred to as SSH-1 and SSH-2.</br>

### Definition
SSH uses public-key cryptography to authenticate the remote computer and allow it to authenticate the user, if necessary. There are several ways to use SSH; one is to use automatically generated public-private key pairs to simply encrypt a network connection, and then use password authentication to log on.</br>
Another is to use a manually generated public-private key pair to perform the authentication, allowing users or programs to log in without having to specify a password. In this scenario, anyone can produce a matching pair of different keys (public and private). The public key is placed on all computers that must allow access to the owner of the matching private key (the owner keeps the private key secret). While authentication is based on the private key, the key itself is never transferred through the network during authentication. SSH only verifies whether the same person offering the public key also owns the matching private key. In all versions of SSH it is important to verify unknown public keys, i.e. associate the public keys with identities, before accepting them as valid. Accepting an attacker's public key without validation will authorize an unauthorized attacker as a valid user.</br>

##### Public-key cryptography
In public key cryptography, the key pair used for encryption and decryption, is determined solely by the recipient.</br>
So if you want to send me a message, you must request me to generate a key pair. </br>
I then generate the key pair using a mathematical function, one part of which I send to you(public key) and the other part I keep to myself(private key). You then encrypt the message using the public key and send it to me. I then decrypt the message using my private key.
If I want to send a message to you, I must request you to generate a key pair. You then send me the public key and keep the private key to yourself. I then encrypt using the public key and send it to you and you decrypt using your private key.</br>
The significance of public key cryptography, is that it places the onus of security solely on the communicating end points (and not on the channel). There is no way someone spoofing on the channel can comprise security. The only way security could be compromised is if someone hacks into the end systems. This is where anti-malware programs come in.</br>
Now one thing you must have noticed, is that both the public and private keys are generated from a single mathematical function. Hence in theory, it is possible to calculate one from the other. However in practice, this is computationally expensive. This is how public key cryptography guarantees security.</br>

### Key management
On Unix-like systems, the list of authorized public keys is typically stored in the home directory of the user that is allowed to log in remotely, in the file ~/.ssh/authorized_keys. This file is respected by SSH only if it is not writable by anything apart from the owner and root. When the public key is present on the remote end and the matching private key is present on the local end, typing in the password is no longer required (some software like Message Passing Interface (MPI) stack may need this password-less access to run properly). However, for additional security the private key itself can be locked with a passphrase.</br>
The private key can also be looked for in standard places, and its full path can be specified as a command line setting (the option -i for ssh). The ssh-keygen utility produces the public and private keys, always in pairs.</br>
SSH also supports password-based authentication that is encrypted by automatically generated keys. In this case the attacker could imitate the legitimate server side, ask for the password, and obtain it (man-in-the-middle attack). However, this is possible only if the two sides have never authenticated before, as SSH remembers the key that the server side previously used. The SSH client raises a warning before accepting the key of a new, previously unknown server. Password authentication can be disabled.</br>


