# Introduction to Databases

##### primary key

A primary key is a special relational database table column (or combination of columns) designated to uniquely identify all table records.

A primary key’s main features are:

* It must contain a unique value for each row of data.
* It cannot contain null values.

A primary key is either an existing table column or a column that is specifically generated by the database according to a defined sequence.

##### foreign key 

A FOREIGN KEY is a field (or collection of fields) in one table that refers to the PRIMARY KEY in another table.

The table containing the foreign key is called the child table, and the table containing the candidate key is called the referenced or parent table.


##### surrogate key 

A surrogate key is a unique identifier used in databases for a modeled entity or an object. It is a unique key whose only significance is to act as the primary identifier of an object or entity and is not derived from any other data in the database and may or may not be used as the primary key. The usual surrogate key used is a unique sequential number.


##### Natural Key 

Natural Key (NK) - this is a column or set of columns that have meaning to the user and uniquely identify a row in the table. It could be a Social Security Number, bank account number (although that is only useful for a single bank since there is no guarantee that another bank won't use the same account number), etc. In the second example, the bank account number would have to be paired with a bank identifier if multiple banks were involved. EVERY row in a table MUST have a NK. A NK may or may not be used as a PK; if not a PK, then it may be an Alternate Key (AK). 

# What Is SQL?

SQL goes hand in hand with the relational model because the result of an SQL query is a table (also called, in this context, a __result set__). Thus, a new permanent table can be created in a relational database simply by storing the result set of a query. Similarly, a query can use both permanent tables and the result sets from other queries as inputs.

The SQL language is divided into several distinct parts: the parts that we explore in this book include __SQL schema statements__, which are used to define the data structures stored in the database; __SQL data statements__, which are used to manipulate the data structures previously defined using SQL schema statements; and __QL transaction statements__, which are used to begin, end, and roll back transactions. For example, to create a new table in your database, you would use the SQL schemastatementcreate table,whereastheprocessofpopulatingyournewtablewith data would require the SQL data statement insert.

All database elements created via SQL schema statements are stored in a special set of tables called the __data dictionary__. This “data about the database” is known collectively as __metadata__. Just like tables that you create yourself, data dictionary tables can be queried via a select statement, thereby allowing you to discover the current data structures deployed in the database at runtime.

##### SQL: A Nonprocedural Language

> A procedural language defines both the desired results and the mecha- nism, or process, by which the results are generated. Nonprocedural languages also define the desired results, but the process by which the results are generated is left to an external agent.

With SQL, however, you will need to give up some of the control you are used to, because SQL statements define the necessary inputs and outputs, but the manner in which a statement is executed is left to a component of your database engine known as the __optimizer__. The optimizer’s job is to look at your SQL statements and, taking into account how your tables are configured and what indexes are available, decide the most efficient execution path (well, not always the most efficient). Most database engines will allow you to influence the optimizer’s decisions by specifying __optimizer hints__, such as suggesting that a particular index be used; most SQL users, however, will never get to this level of sophistication and will leave such tweaking to their database adminis- trator or performance expert.

With SQL, therefore, you will not be able to write complete applications. Unless you are writing a simple script to manipulate certain data, you will need to integrate SQL with your favorite programming language. Some database vendors have done this for you, such as Oracle’s PL/SQL language, MySQL’s stored procedure language, and Microsoft’s Transact-SQL language. With these languages, the SQL data statements are part of the language’s grammar, allowing you to seamlessly integrate database queries with procedural commands. If you are using a non-database-specific language such as Java, however, you will need to use a toolkit/API to execute SQL statements from your code. Some of these toolkits are provided by your database vendor, whereas others are created by third-party vendors or by open source providers. 

