### From Drum-Buffer-Rope to Kanban

Kan-ban is a Japanese word that literally means “signal card” in English. In a manufacturing environment, this card is used as a signal to tell an upstream step in a process to produce more. The workers at each step in the process are not allowed to do work unless they are signaled with a kanban from a downstream step. Although I was aware of this mechanism, I was not convinced that it was either a useful or a viable technique for application to knowledge work and specifically software engineering. I understood that a kanban system would enable a sustainable pace. However, I was not aware of its reputation as a method for driving incremental process improvement. I was unaware that Taiichi Ohno, one of the creators of the Toyota Production System had said, “The two pillars of the Toyota production system are just-in-time and automation with a human touch, or autonomation. The tool used to operate the system is kanban.” In other words, kanban is fundamental to the kaizen (“continuous improvement”) process used at Toyota. It is the mechanism that makes it work. I have come to recognize this as a complete truth through my experiences over the five years since.

### The Value of Kanban is Counter-Intuitive

In many ways, knowledge work is the antithesis of a repetitive production activity. Software development is most certainly not like manufacturing. The domains exhibit wildly different attributes. Manufacturing has low variability, while much of software development is highly variable and seeks to exploit variability through novelty in design in order to drive profit. Software is by nature “soft” and often can be changed easily and cheaply, while manufacturing tends to center on “hard” things that are difficult to change. 

