__AngularJS is client-side. PHP is server-side. __

AngularJS is a frontend framework which actually acts as a backend tool and lets you create what we call "single page web application".

PHP is only a backend, server side scripting language and cannot compare at all with AngularJS. What can make sense is having a web application made with AngularJS and sometimes requiring backend computation (like accessing data from a database) and in this case the server side language used to communicate with Angular can be anything (PHP, Python, Ruby). But it will most likely act as an API and just send raw data as JSON.

Basically, Angular handles all the viewing etc inside the browser and on the same page, sending requests to the backend API (e.g created via PHP) to handle database requests and so forth. Angular and PHP serves two completely different functions and can be used together, not in place of one another. 

It might help to better understand what AngularJS actually is. AngularJS is a Javascript frontend framework typically used to make single page applications inside the browser. That is, it deals with user interactions directly in the browser without having to request a new page from the server every time. It loads new "pages" by inserting new content into the page by requesting partials (kinda like AJAX), and requests for data that need to be processed by a backend server (e.g database queries) are handled by sending the appropriate HTTP requests to the server backend API. For example, to query the database for all users in your app, you could send a GET request to ../api/users which would then query the database/cache and return the data back to Angular for use.

One of the benefits of this kind of structure is that the backend API could be PHP or  Node/Express or whatever suits your fancy. Since we're just dealing with the API interface, Angular's requests aren't dependent on the language of your backend API: just that the API returns and handles data as it should. What this means essentially is that if at some point you decide to switch from PHP to NodeJS/Express, once you get the API set up to handle the same requests, its all smooth sailing from there; no need to  modify your Angular frontend. Conversely, if you ever decide you need to change or add a new frontend (e.g switch from Angular to another framework, or make a mobile app for your site) you don't need to edit your API or your backend logic; you can just use the same API for different front end interfaces.
