## 3.2 Our Preferred Project Layout

We rely on a three-tiered approach that builds on what is generated by the django-admin.py startproject management command. We place that inside another directory which serves as the git repository root. Our layouts at the highest level are:

```
<repository_root>/
  <django_project_root>/
    <configuration_root>/
```

## 3.3 Sample Project Layout

```
icecreamratings_project/
  .gitignore
  Makefile
  docs/
  README.rst
  requirements.txt
  icecreamratings/
    manage.py
    media/ # Development ONLY!
  products/
  profiles/
  ratings/
  static/
  templates/
  config/
    __init__.py
  settings/
    urls.py
    wsgi.py
```

Let’s do an in-depth review of this layout. As you can see, in the icecreamratings project/ directory, which is the <repository root> , we have the following files and directories:
* .gitignore : Lists the files and directories that Git should ignore. (This file is different for other version control systems. For example, if you are using Mercurial instead, you'd have an .hgignore file.)
* README.rst and docs/ : Developer-facing project documentation.
* Makefile : Contains simple deployment tasks and macros. For more complex deployments you may want to rely on tools like Invoke, Paver, or Fabric.
* requirements.txt : A list of Python packages required by your project, including the Django 1.8 package.
* icecreamratings/ : The <django project root> of the project.

Inside the icecreamratings project/icecreamratings directory, at the <django project root>, we place the following files/directories:
* config/ : The <configuration root> of the project, where project-wide settings, urls.py, and wsgi.py modules are placed.  
* manage.py : If you leave this in, don't modify its contents.  
* media/ : For use in development only: user-generated static media assets such as photos uploaded by users. For larger projects, this will be hosted on separate static media server(s).
* products/ : App for managing and displaying ice cream brands.
* profiles/ : App for managing and displaying user profiles.
* ratings/ : App for managing user ratings.
* static/ : Non-user-generated static media assets including CSS, JavaScript, and images. For larger projects, this will be hosted on separate static media server(s). templates/ Where you put your site-wide Django templates.


