## Introduction
Distributed systems use local area networks, wide area networks and internetworks for communication. The performance, reliability, scalability, mobility and quality of service characteristics of the underlying networks impact the behaviour of distributed systems and hence affect their design. Changes in user requirements have resulted in the emergence of wireless networks and of high-performance networks with quality of service guarantees.

The networks used in distributed systems are built from a variety of *transmission media*, including wire, cable, fibre and wireless channels; hardware devices, including routers, switches, bridges, hubs, repeaters and network interfaces; and software components, including protocol stacks, communication handlers and drivers. The resulting functionality and performance available to distributed system and application programs is affected by all of these. We shall refer to the collection of hardware and software components that provide the communication facilities for a distributed system as a __communication subsystem__. The computers and other devices that use the network for communication purposes are referred to as *hosts*. The term *node* is used to refer to any computer or switching device attached to a network.

The Internet is a single communication subsystem providing communication between all of the hosts that are connected to it. The Internet is constructed from many subnets. A subnet is a unit of routing (delivering data from one part of the Internet to another); it is a collection of nodes that can all be reached on the same physical network. The Internet’s infrastructure includes an architecture and hardware and software components that effectively integrate diverse subnets into a single data communication service.

The design of a communication subsystem is strongly influenced by the characteristics of the operating systems used in the computers of which the distributed system is composed as well as the networks that interconnect them. 

### Networking issues for distributed systems
Early computer networks were designed to meet a few, relatively simple application requirements. Network applications such as file transfer, remote login, electronic mail and newsgroups were supported. The subsequent development of distributed systems with support for distributed application programs accessing shared files and other resources set a higher standard of performance to meet the needs of interactive applications.

More recently, following the growth and commercialization of the Internet and the emergence of many new modes of use, more stringent requirements for reliability, scalability, mobility, security and quality of service have emerged. In this section, we define and describe the nature of each of these requirements.

#### Performance 
The network performance parameters that are of primary interest for our purposes are those affecting the speed with which individual messages can be transferred between two interconnected computers. These are the latency and the point- to-point data transfer rate:

* __Latency__ is the delay that occurs after a send operation is executed and before data starts to arrive at the destination computer. It can be measured as the time required to transfer an empty message. Here we are considering only network latency, which forms a part of the process-to-process latency defined in Section 2.4.1.
* __Data transfer rate__ is the speed at which data can be transferred between two computers in the network once transmission has begun, usually quoted in bits per second.

Following from these definitions, the time required for a network to transfer a message containing length bits between two computers is:

> Message transmission time = latency + length ⁄ data transfer rate

The above equation is valid for messages whose length does not exceed a maximum that is determined by the underlying network technology. Longer messages have to be segmented and the transmission time is the sum of the times for the segments.

__The transfer rate of a network is determined primarily by its physical characteristics, whereas the latency is determined primarily by software overheads, routing delays and a load-dependent statistical element arising from conflicting demands for access to transmission channels.Many of the messages transferred between processes in distributed systems are small in size; latency is therefore often of equal or greater significance than transfer rate in determining performance.__

The total system bandwidth of a network is a measure of throughput – the total volume of traffic that can be transferred across the network in a given time. In many local area network technologies, such as Ethernet, the full transmission capacity of the network is used for every transmission and the system bandwidth is the same as the data transfer rate. But in most wide area networks messages can be transferred on several different channels simultaneously, and the total system bandwidth bears no direct relationship to the transfer rate. The performance of networks deteriorates in conditions of overload – when there are too many messages in the network at the same time. The precise effect of overload on the latency, data transfer rate and total system bandwidth of a network depends strongly on the network technology.

Now consider the performance of client-server communication. The time required to transmit a short request message and receive a short reply between nodes on a lightly loaded local network (including system overheads) is about half a millisecond. This should be compared with the sub-microsecond time required to invoke an operation on an application-level object in the local memory. Thus, despite advances in network performance, the time required to access shared resources on a local network remains about a thousand times greater than that required to access resources that are resident in local memory. But networks often outperform hard disks; networked access to a local web server or file server with a large in-memory cache of frequently used files can match or outstrip access to files stored on a local hard disk.

On the Internet, round-trip latencies are in the 5–500 ms range, with means of 20–200 ms depending on distance, so requests transmitted across the Internet are 10–100 times slower than those sent on fast local networks. The bulk of this time difference derives from switching delays at routers and contention for network circuits.

#### Scalability
Computer networks are an indispensable part of the infrastructure of modern societies. The potential future size of the Internet is commensurate with the population of the planet. It is realistic to expect it to include several billion nodes and hundreds of millions of active hosts.These numbers indicate the future changes in size and load that the Internet must handle. The network technologies on which it is based were not designed to cope with even the Internet’s current scale, but they have performed remarkably well. Some substantial changes to the addressing and routing mechanisms are in progress in order to handle the next phase of the Internet’s growth.

#### Reliability
Many applications are able to recover from communication failures and hence do not require guaranteed error-free communication. The end-to-end argument further supports the view that the communication subsystem need not provide totally error-free communication; the detection of communication errors and their correction is often best performed by application-level software. The reliability of most physical transmission media is very high. When errors occur they are usually due to failures in the software at the sender or receiver (for example, failure by the receiving computer to accept a packet) or buffer overflow rather than errors in the network.

#### Security
The first level of defence adopted by most organizations is to protect its networks and the computers attached to them with a firewall. A firewall creates a protection boundary between the organization’s intranet and the rest of the Internet. __The purpose of the firewall is to protect the resources in all of the computers inside the organization from access by external users or processes and to control the use of resources outside the firewall by users inside the organization.__

__A firewall runs on a gateway – a computer that stands at the network entry point to an organization’s intranet. The firewall receives and filters all of the messages travelling into and out of an organization. It is configured according to the organization’s security policy to allow certain incoming and outgoing messages to pass through it and to reject all others.__

To enable distributed applications to move beyond the restrictions imposed by firewalls there is a need to produce a secure network environment in which a wide range of distributed applications can be deployed, with end-to-end authentication, privacy and security. This finer-grained and more flexible form of security can be achieved through the use of cryptographic techniques. Exceptions include the need to protect network components such as routers against unauthorized interference with their operation and the need for secure links to mobile devices and other external nodes to enable them to participate in a secure intranet – the __virtual private network (VPN)__ concept.

#### Mobility 
Mobile devices such as laptop computers and Internet-capable mobile phones are moved frequently between locations and reconnected at convenient network connection points or even used while on the move. Wireless networks provide connectivity to such devices, but the addressing and routing schemes of the Internet were developed before the advent of these mobile devices and are not well adapted to their need for intermittent connection to many different subnets. The Internet’s mechanisms have been adapted and extended to support mobility, but the expected future growth in the use of mobile devices will demand further development.

#### Quality of service
We defined quality of service as including the ability to meet deadlines when transmitting and processing streams of real-time multimedia data. This imposes major new requirements on computer networks. Applications that transmit multimedia data require guaranteed bandwidth and bounded latencies for the communication channels that they use. Some applications vary their demands dynamically and specify both a minimum acceptable quality of service and a desired optimum.

#### Multicasting 
Most communication in distributed systems is between pairs of processes, but there often is also a need for one-to-many communication. While this can be simulated by sends to several destinations, that is more costly than necessary and may not exhibit the fault-tolerance characteristics required by applications. For these reasons, many network technologies support the simultaneous transmission of messages to several recipients.

## Types of network
Here we introduce the main types of network that are used to support distributed systems: personal area networks, local area networks, wide area networks, metropolitan area networks and the wireless variants of them. Internetworks such as the Internet are constructed from networks of all these types.

We refer to networks that are composed of many interconnected networks, integrated to provide a single data communication medium, as internetworks. The Internet is the prototypical internetwork; it is composed of millions of local, metropolitan and wide area networks.

* Personal area networks (PANs) : PANs are a subcategory of local networks in which the various digital devices carried by a user are connected by a low-cost, low-energy network. Wired PANs are not of much significance because few users wish to be encumbered by a network of wires on their person, but wireless personal area networks (WPANs) are of increasing importance due to the number of personal devices such as mobile phones, tablets, digital cameras, music players and so on that are now carried by many people. 
* Local area networks (LANs) • LANs carry messages at relatively high speeds between computers connected by a single communication medium, such as twisted copper wire,coaxial cable or optical fibre. A segment is a section of cable that serves a department or a floor of a building and may have many computers attached. No routing of messages is required within a segment, since the medium provides direct connections between all of the computers connected to it. The total system bandwidth is shared between the computers connected to a segment. Larger local networks, such as those that serve a campus or an office building, are composed of many segments interconnected by switches or hubs. In local area networks, the total system bandwidth is high and latency is low, except when message traffic is very high.
* Wide area networks (WANs) : WANs carry messages at lower speeds between nodes that are often in different organizations and may be separated by large distances. They may be located in different cities, countries or continents. The communication medium is a set of communication circuits linking a set of dedicated computers called routers. They manage the communication network and route messages or packets to their destinations. In most networks, the routing operations introduce a delay at each point in the route, so the total latency for the transmission of a message depends on the route that it follows and the traffic loads in the various network segments that it traverses. In current networks these latencies can be as high as 0.1 to 0.5 seconds. The speed of electronic signals in most media is close to the speed of light, and this sets a lower bound on the transmission latency for long-distance networks. For example, the propagation delay for a signal to travel from Europe to Australia via a terrestrial link is approximately 0.13 seconds and signals via a geostationary satellite between any two points on the Earth’s surface are subject to a delay of approximately 0.20 seconds.
* Metropolitan area networks (MANs) : This type of network is based on the high- bandwidth copper and fibre optic cabling recently installed in some towns and cities for the transmission of video, voice and other data over distances of up to 50 kilometres. 
* Wireless local area networks (WLANs) : WLANs are designed for use in place of wired LANs to provide connectivity for mobile devices, or simply to remove the need for a wired infrastructure to connect computers within homes and office buildings to each other and the Internet. 
* Wireless metropolitan area networks (WMANs)
* Wireless wide area networks (WWANs)
* Internetworks : An internetwork is a communication subsystem in which several networks are linked together to provide common data communication facilities that overlay the technologies and protocols of the individual component networks and the methods used for their interconnection.Internetworks are needed for the development of extensible, open distributed systems. The openness characteristic of distributed systems implies that the networks used in distributed systems should be extensible to very large numbers of computers, whereas individual networks have restricted address spaces and some have performance limitations that are incompatible with their large-scale use. In internetworks, a variety of local and wide area network technologies can be integrated to provide the networking capacity needed by each group of users. Thus internetworks bring many of the benefits of open systems to the provision of communication in distributed systems.Internetworks are constructed from a variety of component networks. They are interconnected by dedicated switching computers called routers and general-purpose computers called gateways, and an integrated communication subsystem is produced by a software layer that supports the addressing and transmission of data to computers throughout the internetwork. The result can be thought of as a ‘virtual network’ constructed by overlaying an internetwork layer on a communication medium that consists of the underlying networks, routers and gateways. The Internet is the major instance of internetworking, and its TCP/IP protocols are an example of this integration layer.

## Network principles











