__Dynamic loading__ is a mechanism by which a computer program can, at run time, load a library (or other binary) into memory, retrieve the addresses of functions and variables contained in the library, execute those functions or access those variables, and unload the library from memory. It is one of the 3 mechanisms by which a computer program can use some other software; the other two are __static linking__ and __dynamic linking__. Unlike static linking and dynamic linking, dynamic loading allows a computer program to start up in the absence of these libraries, to discover available libraries, and to potentially gain additional functionality.

#### What is the exact difference between dynamic loading and dynamic linking?

Dynamic loading refers to mapping (or less often copying) an executable or library into a process's memory after is has started.  Dynamic linking refers to resolving symbols - associating their names with addresses or offsets - after compile time.  The reason it's hard to make a distinction is that the two are often done together without recognizing the subtle distinctions around the parts I put in bold.  Perhaps the clearest way to explain is to go through what the different combinations would mean in practice.

* Dynamic loading, static linking.  The executable has an address/offset table generated at compile time, but the actual code/data aren't loaded into memory at process start.  This is not the way things tend to work in most systems nowadays, but it would describe some old-fashioned overlay systems.  I'd also be utterly unsurprised if some current embedded systems work this way too.  In either case, the goal is to give the programmer control over memory use while also avoiding the overhead of linking at runtime.
* Static loading, dynamic linking.  This is how dynamic libraries specified at compile time usually work.  The executable contains a reference to the dynamic/shared library, but the symbol table is missing or incomplete.  Both loading and linking occur at process start, which is considered "dynamic" for linking but not for loading.
* Dynamic loading, dynamic linking.  This is what happens when you call ```dlopen``` or its equivalent on other systems.  The object file is loaded dynamically under program control (i.e. after start), and symbols both in the calling program and in the library are resolved based on the process's possibly-unique memory layout at that time.
* Static loading, static linking.  Everything is resolved at compile time.  At process start everything is loaded into memory immediately and no extra resolution (linking) is necessary.  In the abstract it's not necessary for the loading to occur from a single file, but I don't think the actual formats or implementations (at least those I'm familiar with) can do multi-file loading without dynamic linking.

