The git commit command captures a snapshot of the project's currently staged changes. Committed snapshots can be thought of as “safe” versions of a project—Git will never change them unless you explicitly ask it to. Prior to the execution of git commit, The git add command is used to promote or 'stage' changes to the project that will be stored in a commit. These two commands ```git commit``` and ```git add``` are two of the most frequently used.

### Git commit vs SVN commit

While they share the same name, git commit is nothing like svn commit. This shared term can be a point of confusion for Git newcomers who have a svn background, and it is important to emphasize the difference. To compare git commit vs svn commit is to compare a centralized application model (svn) vs a distributed application model (Git). In SVN, a commit pushes changes from the local SVN client, to a remote centralized shared SVN repository. In Git, repositories are distributed, Snapshots are committed to the local repository, and this requires absolutely no interaction with other Git repositories. Git commits can later be pushed to arbitrary remote repositories.

### How it works

At a high-level, Git can be thought of as a timeline management utility. Commits are the core building block units of a Git project timeline. Commits can be thought of as snapshots or milestones along the timeline of a Git project. Commits are created with the git commit command to capture the state of a project at that point in time. Git Snapshots are always committed to the local repository. This is fundamentally different from SVN, wherein the working copy is committed to the central repository. In contrast, Git doesn’t force you to interact with the central repository until you’re ready. Just as the staging area is a buffer between the working directory and the project history, each developer’s local repository is a buffer between their contributions and the central repository.

This changes the basic development model for Git users. Instead of making a change and committing it directly to the central repo, Git developers have the opportunity to accumulate commits in their local repo. This has many advantages over SVN-style collaboration: it makes it easier to split up a feature into atomic commits, keep related commits grouped together, and clean up local history before publishing it to the central repository. It also lets developers work in an isolated environment, deferring integration until they’re at a convenient point to merge with other users. While isolation and deferred integration are individually beneficial, it is in a team's best interest to integrate frequently and in small units. For more information regarding best practices for Git team collaboration read how teams structure their Git workflow.

